                                         Fire Snowballs
Purpose
   To demonstrate a colloidal system that can be ignited into a fireball.
Materials
   calcium acetate (hydrated)                              50 mL beakers (2)
   ethanol                                                 100 mL graduated cylinder
Procedure
   1.      Prepare saturated solution of calcium acetate (Solution A). Dissolve 37 grams of
           CaCH3COO in 100 mL of cold (0 C) distilled water. Must be prepared prior to
           demo, to allow solution to cool.
   2.      Place 5.0 mL of Solution A into a 50 mL beaker.
   3.      Measure out 30 mL of denatured ethanol (Solution B) and pour it into another 50 mL
           beaker.
   4.      Pour Solution A into Solution B and back again. A gel will form.
   5.      Remove the gel into your hands and form a sphere, squeezing out as much water as
           possible.
   6.      Rinse your hands, removing any excess solution.
   7.      With your hands still wet, turn off the lights, ignite the sphere with a match and toss
           the fireball from hand to hand. Three balls can be juggled.
Additional Information
   1.      This is sterno. The flame is cold enough to handle with wet hands. Do not allow
           hands to dry, for the flame will be too hot.
   2.      The gel is a colloidal system consisting of a liquid (alcohol) dispersed in a solid
           (calcium acetate).
   3.      The structure of the gel is unclear. The calcium acetate probably forms a network
           that traps ethanol molecules.
   4.      Other gels include jelly, gelatin, agar.
Questions for the Students
   1.      What is a gel?
   2.      What are some properties of this gel?
   3.      Name some other gels.
                                                                       Liquids, Solids and Colloids 3


Disposal
  Solids can be thrown into the trash, and solutions can be washed down the drain with excess
  water.
Reference
   Summerlin, L. & Ealy, J; Chemical Demonstrations, A Sourcebook for Teachers, 1985.
Liquids, Solids and Colloids 4
