                                  Hydrogen Bonding in Slime
Purpose
   To demonstrate the production of a polymer that flows and sheers, if twisted.
Materials
   two 100 mL beakers                               poly(vinyl alcohol)
   food coloring                                    sodium tetraborate
   two 50 mL graduated cylinders                    wooden stick
Procedure
   1.     Prepare the following two solutions:
           a. Poly(vinyl alcohol) is a 4% solution. Add 4.0 grams to 96 mL of water. Heat to
               70 C until the solution clears. Do not boil.
           b. Sodium tetraborate is a 4% solution. Add 4.0 grams of sodium tetraborate
              (Na2B4O7 • 10 H2O) to 96 mL of water.
   2.     Measure out 50 mL of the poly(vinyl alcohol) solution and pour into a 100 mL
          beaker.
   3.     Measure out 10 mL of sodium tetraborate into another beaker and add one drop of
          food coloring.
   4.     Observe the characteristics of the two clear solutions before mixing.
   5.     Pour the sodium tetraborate into the poly(vinyl alcohol) while stirring vigorously with
          a wooden stick.
   6.     Examine the properties of the cross-linked polymer.
Additional Information
                                                                       CH2    CH x
   1.     Poly(vinyl alcohol) is a polymer derived from the
                                                                              O
          monomer vinyl alcohol.
                                                                           H     H
   2.     The tetraborate forms a complex structure B4O5(OH)4-2,              O
          that links the poly(vinyl alcohol) polymer strands by                B
          hydrogen bonds.                                                        O
   3.     Cross-linking can be compared with hydrogen bonding                  B
          that links the DNA molecule or proteins into specific               O
          structures.                                                      H     H
                                                                              O
   4.     The polymer is nontoxic.
                                                                              CH     CH2
                                                                                          x
                                                                                      Polymers 3


   5.      If pressed into a design written with a magic marker, the slime will pick up the
           design.
Disposal
   The slim can be disposed of in the trash when it becomes boring.
Reference
   Summerlin, L., Borgford, C., Ealy, J. Chemical Demonstrations, Volume II, 1987.
Polymers 4
