                                       Hydrogen Rocket
Purpose
   To demonstrate an exothermic reaction between hydrogen and oxygen in the presence of a
   combustible material.
Materials
       Matches/Lighter                              Watch glass
       Lycopodium powder                            Spoon
       Ear protection (optional)                    Rubber tube for H2 gas
       Metal Rocket Apparatus                       Candle on a stick
Procedure
   1.      Place a watch glass underneath the metal hydrogen rocket apparatus.
   2.      Carefully add about two spoonfuls of lycopodium powder to the watch glass.
   3.      Place finger over hole in the top of the rocket and insert the rubber hose into bottom
           of rocket.
   4.      Let the H2 gas flow for 1-2 minutes to ensure the rocket fills with the gas. Be sure to
           hold the rocket upright while filling.
   5.      Place the rocket on the stand, light the hydrogen at the hole on the top of the rocket
           with the candle on the stick. Step back, dim the lights and cover your ears.
   6.      Wait approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute. When the flame disappears, a low
           whistling can be heard just before the gases explode loudly and the lycopodium
           powder ignites.
Additional Information
   1. The reaction is
           2 H2(g) + O2(g) → H2O(g)
   2. The lycopodium powder is optional but adds greatly to the rocket effect.
Variation
    This demonstration can be done using a Pringles can. A hole the size of a quarter should be
    cut in the center of the can lid. A small hole should be punched in the bottom of the can
    with a nail. Place the lid on the can, invert it, cover the small hole with your finger and fill
    the can with hydrogen gas. Place the can on a small iron ring on a ring stand. Ignite the
    hydrogen as above. The reaction takes about 100 seconds.
                                                                                            Gasses 23


Safety
        Never attempt to refill the hydrogen rocket with additional hydrogen once the top is lit.
        Wear ear protection and light the rocket from a distance.
Disposal
        Once the demo is complete, the lycopodium powder can be cleaned off the counter and
        reused for this demo.
Gases 24
