                                   Le Chatelier’s Principle
Purpose
   To demonstrate how the equilibrium position of a gaseous reaction shifts when the volume of
   the container is changed.
Materials
   100 mL graduated cylinder                             copper metal
   250 mL Erlenmeyer flask                               concentrated HNO3
   one hole stopper                                      2 feet tygon tubing
   2 oz. plastic syringe plunger
Procedure
1.     Use lecture bottle of NO2 to fill the Erlenmeyer flask. DO THIS IN THE HOOD!
2.     Immediately place the stopper on the flask and insert the other end of the tygon tubing
       into the 100 mL graduated cylinder. This will allow the NO2(g) formed in the flask to
       flow into the cylinder.
3.     After enough NO2(g) has flowed into the cylinder to give a medium brown color, place
       the plunger from the syringe into the top of the graduated cylinder, trapping the gas.
4.     Suddenly push the plunger from the 100 mL mark to about the 50 mL mark causing the
       concentration of the NO2 to approximately double. Notice the darkening of the color of
       the gas.
5.     Continue holding the plunger at the 50 mL mark and observe that the color lightens as the
       equilibrium shifts.
6.     The process can be repeated any number of times.
Additional Information
1.     The equilibrium reaction occurring in the graduated cylinder is:
                2 NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g)              brown colorless
       As the plunger is suddenly pushed in, halving the volume, the NO2 concentration is
       doubled. This causes the equilibrium to shift to the right, toward the colorless N2O4,
       illustrating Le Chatelier’s Principle, which predicts that if the volume of the vessel
       containing a gas phase equilibrium reaction is decreased, the position of the equilibrium
       shifts toward the side with fewer molecules.
2.     Warning NO2(g) is a highly toxic, highly corrosive gas. The NO2(g) should be generated
       in a fume hood.
           Alternative method for NO2 generation:
                                                                                      Equilibrium 5


       a.      Insert a piece of glass tubing into the one hole stopper and connect the tygon
               tubing to it.
       b.      Place a few grams of copper metal in the 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask.
       c.      In a hood, pour enough concentrated HNO3 onto the copper in the Erlenmeyer
               flask to cover the copper pieces.
3.     Rinse the plunger with water immediately after use to minimize the corrosive effects of
       the NO2 on the rubber seal.
4.     Trial and error is necessary in order to find a 100 mL graduated cylinder with the correct
       size bore for the plastic plunger. A snug fit is essential for correct functioning of the
       demonstration.
Reference
   Steven Zumdahl, University of Illinois Department of Chemistry.
Equilibrium 6
