                                            Rising Water
Purpose
   To demonstrate atmospheric pressure and the volume difference between a liquid and a gas.
Materials
   large beaker                                          hot plate
   large cylinder                                        food coloring
Procedure
   1.      Fill the large beaker about halfway with water. Add a few drops of food coloring.
   2.      Place the cylinder upside down in the water.
   3.      Boil the water and continue heating for several minutes. Bubbles should be coming
           out of the cylinder.
   4.      Remove the beaker from the heat.
   5.      Notice the water being pushed up into the cylinder.
Additional Information
   1.      Water vapor from the boiling water fills the cylinder, pushing the air out (hence the
           bubbles). Atmospheric pressure pushes the water into the cylinder once the vapor cools
           and condenses.
   2.      If you are using a large enough beaker and cylinder for a lecture hall (on the order of 1
           to 2 liters), it could take quite a while to heat the water (close to an hour). In this case,
           you should heat the water to almost boiling before the lecture to save time during the
                                                                                              Gases 19


          lecture. It may also take a few minutes for the pressure difference to be enough to
          cause the water to be pushed up the cylinder.
Questions for the Students
                                                                                     Gases 19


   1.     What is the cause of the bubbles coming out of the cylinder?
   2.     What is the pressure in the cylinder before the water boils? as it is boiling? after the
          beaker is taken from the heat?
   3.     How does water get into the tube? Is it pushed or pulled?
Reference
DeCoste, Don. University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
                                                                                          Gases 19
