                          Seeing the Light – Titration Reactions
Purpose
      To demonstrate conductivity and the titration of a strong acid with a strong base yielding
      a precipitate
Materials
      conductivity apparatus                              0.01 M H2SO4
               buret / clamp                                  0.02 M Ba(OH)2∙8H2O
               250 mL beaker                                  ringstand / clamp
               magnetic stirrer / bar                         phenolphthalein
Procedure
1.    Prepare 0.01 M H2SO4. Mix 56 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid with distilled water and
      bring the volume to one liter. This solution is 1.0 M. Use 10.0 mL of the 1.0 M solution
      and mix with distilled water to bring to the volume to one liter. This solution is 0.01 M
      H2SO4.
2.    Prepare 0.02 M Ba(OH)2 8H2O. Dissolve 1.6 gram of hydrated barium hydroxide in
      distilled water and bring the volume to one liter. Filter the solution if it appears cloudy.
3.    Check the conductivity of both solutions by using about 50 mL in a beaker with the
      conductivity apparatus.
4.             Fill a clean, dry 50 mL buret with the base solution.
5.    Pour out 25 mL of the acid into the 250 mL beaker and add 8-10 drops of
      phenolphthalein.
6.    Place the beaker on a magnetic stirrer. Place the electrodes of the apparatus in the beaker.
      Be sure that the electrodes do not hit the stirring bar.
                                                                                      Acids/Bases 6


7.             Fix the buret so that a slow constant flow of the base enters the beaker.
8.             Stress to students the change of light intensity and the color of the solution.
9.     Continue titration until the bulb goes out. Further titrate. The solution turns pink, the
       bulb goes back on with increased intensity.
Additional Information
1.     Sulfuric acid is a strong acid and barium hydroxide solution is a strong base. They are
       both excellent conductors of electricity, due to the presence of their respective ions. Thus
       the bulb glows brightly in the presence of both. When the two solutions are mixed
       together, however, the brightness of the light steadily decreases. This decrease is caused
       by the formation of the white barium sulfate precipitate. Remember, all ionic salts do not
       readily dissociate.
2.     At the end point of this reaction, the solution turns pink due to the presence of the
       indicator.
3.     As more Ba(OH)2 solution is added, an excess of ions is again produced, allowing the
       bulb to glow once more.
4.             Back titrate with the acid to find the endpoint again.
Additional Information
Waste should be collected in a labelled container with UI# 203462.
Questions for the Students
                                                                                       Acids/Bases 6


1.    What are the major species in the beaker before the titration?
2.    Should the solution in the beaker conduct electricity? Explain.
3.    What are the major species in the buret?
4.    Should this solution conduct electricity? Explain?
5.    What reaction is taking place during the titration?
6.    Why did the light go out?
7.    What are the major species in the solution now?
8.    Why did the phenolphthalein turn pink after the light was out?
9.    Why did the light go back on?
10.   What are the major species in the solution now?
Reference
ICE, Chemical Demonstrations Workshop, University of Arizona, 1985
                                                                      Acids/Bases 6
