                                         Thermite Reaction
Purpose
   To demonstrate a spectacular exothermic reaction that produces enough heat to produce
   molten iron.
Materials
       2 clay flower pots (6.5 cm diameter                      ferric oxide powder
            with 1.0 cm hole in bottom)                         aluminum powder
       filter paper                                             potassium permanganate
       spatula                                                  glycerin
       heat resistant gloves                                    dry sand in large flower pot
       ring stand / ring
Procedure
   1.       Place a piece of filter paper over the bottom opening
            of clay pot #1.
   2.       Place clay pot #1 into clay pot #2.
   3.       Mix 50 grams of Fe2O3 powder with 15 grams of
            aluminum powder.
   4.       Place the mixture into clay pot #1 and form a small
            cone-shaped indentation in the center of the mixture
            (about 2.0 cm deep and 1-2 cm wide).
   5.       Just before preforming the demo, grind 25 grams of
            KMnO4 crystals to a powder and fill the indentation
            with the powder.
   6.       Form another small cone-shaped indentation in the permanganate powder.
   7.       Place the two clay pots inside an iron ring clamped high on the ring stand and place
            the container of sand on the ring stand base below the clay pots.
   8.       Place 5-6 mL of glycerine in a small beaker.
   9.       Pour the glycerine into the depression formed in the KMnO4 crystals. Step back
            immediately. Ignition will occur in 15-60 seconds.
   10.      If the reaction fails, wait 1-2 minutes after the initial flare from the glycerine-KMnO4
            reaction. Add more glycerine and potassium permanganate.
   11.      Flame, flying sparks, smoke and dust are produced. Molten iron will run through the
            hole in the pot into the sand bath.
                                                                              Reactions: Exothermic 41


Additional Information
   1.      Perform the demonstration outdoors unless a large, well, ventilated room is available.
           The reaction produces a tremendous amount of smoke.
   2.      Sparks may be thrown two meters vertically and up to five meters horizontally. Use a
           safety shield.
   3.      A most spectacular demonstration but great care is required. Try this demonstration
           alone prior to performing before a group.
   4.      Never drop the iron into water or wet sand. A steam explosion can result sending hot
           iron into the audience.
   5.      A variation involves using commercial thermite/starter material.
           a. Fill the small clay pot ¼ full with thermite powder followed by a thin layer of
               thermite ignition mixture.
           b. Mix 1.0 gram of potassium chlorate and 1.0 gram of granulated sugar and pour
               the mixture on the flattened top of the thermite/starter material.
           c. Form a small depression in the top of the sugar-KClO3 mixture.
           d. Add 1 or 2 drops of concentrated sulfuric acid to the depression and step back.
           e. Within seconds, a flame is produced, followed by sparks and smoke. Solid iron
              with aluminum oxide remains on the ring stand.
           NOTE: Do not set this version up more than one hour in advance.
Disposal
   After they have cooled, the flower pots can be collected and written up with UI# 214624.
Reference
   Shakhashiri, Bassam; Chemical Demonstrations, Volume I, 1983.
Reactions: Exothermic 42
