                                       Aluminum and Iodine
Purpose
To demonstrate the spectacular reaction between two solids Al and I2.
Materials
powdered aluminum                                     wash bottle / water
solid iodine crystals                                 small beaker
mortar and pestle
Procedure
        Preparation
    1. Place 30 g of iodine crystals in a mortar. Grind to a fine powder.
    2. Place 6 g of powdered Al in a small beaker.
        Presentation
    1. Add the Al to the I2 crystals in the mortar.
    2. Near the downdraft hood grind the two solids together. The reaction may begin during
        this process producing fire and large volumes of purple smoke.
    3. If the reaction does not begin during grinding, add a small amount (a couple drops) of
        water to the edge of the solid mixture and scrape the wet mixture against the mortar with
        a stirring rod to initiate the reaction.
    4. Step away or use and asbestos glove to tilt the mortar. Large amounts of heat and iodine
        vapor are released.
Additional Information
    1. Iodine vapor will stain hands and clothing. It will sublime off in several hours.
    2. The reaction is as follows:
                 2 Al + 3 I2 2 AlI3
Questions for the Students
    1. Predict the products of the reaction.
                                                                          Reactions: Exothermic 27


   2. Write a balance chemical equation for the reaction.
   3. What is the purple smoke?
   4. Given the amounts used in this reaction predict the limiting reactant.
Disposal
   The mortar and pestle should be thoroughly soaked in the hood to allow for complete
   reaction of the chemicals. Once the mixture no longer produces bubbles or smoke, even after
   vigorous mixing/stirring, the solution can be placed in properly labeled waste container with
   plenty of water and UI# 93389. The container should be checked every so often to make sure
   gas build-up doesn’t occur.
Reference
   University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Reactions: Exothermic 28
