                                        Autocatalysis
Purpose
       To demonstrate the phenomenon of autocatalysis.
Materials
       4 g potassium chlorate                         12.5 g sodium sulfite
       5 mg bromophenol blue indicator                water
       3 M sulfuric acid                              100 mL graduated cylinder
       dropper                                        two 250 mL beakers
Procedure
   1.  Place 50 mL of water in a beaker.
   2.  Add three solids to the water and dissolve. Do not mix solids before addition to water.
   3.  In the second beaker, add 4 mL of 3 M sulfuric acid to 50 mL of water.
   4.  Add the solution from the second beaker to the first beaker, stirring constantly. The
       solution should be blue-violet.
   5. Fill a 100 mL graduated cylinder with the solution.
   6. Add two droppers full of the 3 M sulfuric acid to the top of the liquid in the graduated
       cylinder. A yellow color should appear, and over the course of several minutes should
       move down the graduated cylinder.
Additional Information
   1. The reaction is:
               ClO3−(aq) + 3 HSO3− (aq) → Cl− (aq) + 3 SO42− (aq) + 3 H+(aq)
   2. The H+ is produced by and acts as a catalyst for this reaction. The indicator is yellow in
       highly acidic solutions. The solution is initially blue due to the bisulfite-sulfite buffering
       system (pH about 6.5 to 7.0).
   3. 3 M H2SO4 is made by adding 5 mL concentrated sulfuric acid to 18 mL distilled water.
   4. Point out that the acid simply starts the reaction. If it were the catalyst, the entire solution
       would turn yellow immediately.
Questions for the Students
   1. In this reaction, what is oxidized? What is reduced?
   2. What happens at the interface of the blue and yellow solutions?
Disposal
       Solutions can be poured down the drain with excess water.
Reference
       Summerlin, L. & Ealy J. Chemical Demonstrations: A Sourcebook for Teachers, Volume
       1, Second Edition, 1988.
                                                                        Kinetics/Thermodynamics 3
