                                 Carbon Dioxide Lantern
Purpose
   To demonstrate combustion of magnesium in carbon dioxide.
Materials
   Magnesium turnings                                    Propane torch
   Dry ice (CO2)                                         Lighter/matches
Procedure
   1.     Collect two large pieces of dry ice, one that can sit flat on the table and second piece
          that can be placed on top of the first securely.
   2.     Using a hammer, carve a small bowl shaped indent in the base CO2 piece,
          approximately 2cm deep and 4cm in diameter.
   3.     Fill the depression with magnesium turnings.
   4.     Ignite the magnesium turnings with a propane torch and place the second block of
          CO2 on top of the magnesium.
   5.     Step back and dim the lights.
   6.     Sparks and flames will accompany the reaction
Additional Information
   1.     If magnesium turnings are unavailable, a mixture of 2.0 grams of powder magnesium
          can be ignited with a 6.0 cm strip of magnesium ribbon used as a fuse.
   2.     A mixture of 1.0 gram of powdered aluminum and 1.0 gram of potassium chlorate
          can be poured around the base of the fuse to emphasize the sparks.
   3.     Obviously a CO2 fire extinguisher will not put out a burning magnesium fire (class
          D). It must be smothered with sand.
   4.     The reaction is
              2 Mg (s) + CO2 (g) → 2 MgO (s) + C (s)
                                                                          Reactions: Exothermic 29


              The standard heat of reaction = −809 kJ
   5.      The black residue is a mixture of carbon and Mg3N (s).
Questions for the Students
   1.      How could you put out a Mg fire?
   2.      Write the chemical reaction for this reaction.
Disposal
   The remaining solid from the Mg can be thrown into the trash. The CO2 can be left to
  sublime.
Reference
   Shakharshiri, Bassam; Chemical Demonstrations, Volume I, 1983.
Reactions: Exothermic 30
