                                      Corn Syrup Polarimeter
Purpose:
       To demonstrate the transmission of polarized light through different liquids showing that
       it depends upon the depth and the contents of the liquid.
Materials:
       Light corn syrup                                         Tall beakers or crystallizing dishes
       Water                                                    Overhead projector
       2 polarizing filters                                     Poster board
Procedure:
   1) Cut a hole slightly smaller than the diameter of the beaker (or dish) on a piece of poster
       board (or manila folder). Cover the surface of the overhead projector with this.
   2) Fill one beaker with water and the other with corn syrup. Place these on the overhead
       projector, turn the light on and observe how white light transmits through each liquid.
   3) Starting with the water beaker, place polarizing filters on the top and bottom of the beaker
       and place over the hole. Rotate the top filter and note how the only changes to the projection
       are the dimming and brightening of the light.
   4) Do the same for the corn syrup beaker and note the changes in color that occur as the top
       filter is rotated.
Additional Information:
       Ordinary light is unpolarized, meaning it vibrates randomly in numerous planes. A
       polarizing filter selectively transmits light in only one plane giving what is known as plane-
                                                                          Liquids, Solids, and Colloids 9


      polarized light. When two filters are used the amount of light transmitted depends upon the
      alignment of the axes of the filters relative to one another. If the axes are parallel, then
      almost all of the light, which passes through the first filter, also passes through the second
      filter. However, if the axes of the filters are perpendicular, no light is transmitted through
      the second filter.
      Certain molecules can also cause plane polarized light to rotate and they are referred to as
      optically active. Molecules, which are chiral, possess this ability and are said to be optically
      active. Compounds that rotate the plane of polarized light to the right are dextrorotatory
      (+) and those which rotate the plane of polarized are levorotatory (-). Since water is achiral,
      no difference is observed with or without the polarizing filter. However, corn syrup is a
      solution placed in between two polarizing filters; the light passing through the solution is
      rotated and slowed by the solution. This is observed by the appearance of different colors.
      This effect can be changed by diluting the solution. This not only changes the concentration
      of glucose but also increases the path length for light to travel through.
Disposal:
      Corn syrup can be reused
References:
      https://projects.ncsu.edu/project/chemistrydemos/Organic/Polarimeter.pdf
      Shakhashiri, B. Z. In Chemical Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry;
      The University of Wisconsin Press: 1989; Vol. 3, p 386-389
                                                                          Liquids, Solids, and Colloids 9


Liquids, Solids, and Colloids 9