                            Explosion of Lycopodium Powder
Purpose
   To demonstrate the effect of surface area on the rate of a chemical reaction.
Materials
   exploding can device                                  lycopodium power
   spatula/spoon                                         100 mL beaker
   lighter
Procedure
   1.      Place lycopodium powder in the device.
   2.      Carefully light the birthday candle in the
           device.
   3.      Squeeze firmly on the pipette bulb, and watch
           as the dust cloud from the lycopodium lights.
   4.      After the flame cloud is produced, use the
           beaker to snuff the candle. DO NOT BLOW
           OUT CANDLE, this can cause the
           lycopodium powder to ignite and burn your
           face.
Additional Information
   1.      This demonstration illustrates that a combustible material, as lycopodium powder,
           when finely divided and dispersed in the air, will explode upon ignition.
   2.      The powder will not ignite or burn, however, unless it is air-borne as dust.
   3.      Any spilled powder can be wiped up with a damp cloth and discarded in a waste
           container.
   4.      Tossing very small amounts of lycopodium powder into an open flame will have
           sparkling results.
   5.      Variation:
           a. Assemble the explosion can as diagramed below:
                                                                           Reactions: Explosive 47


           b. Be sure the candle wick is level with the funnel top.
           c. With a spatula, add a small amount of lycopodium powder to the funnel.
           d. Put the shield in place and turn off the lights.
           e. Light the candle. Tongs will be useful. Fireplace matches also work well.
           f. Seal the container uniformly (if the lid is to fly straight up).
           g. Quickly move as far away as possible, while holding the rubber bulb, and squeeze
              the bulb firmly.
Reference
   Aylea, H.N. & Dutton, F.B., Tested Demonstrations in Chemistry, 1965.
Reactions: Explosive 48
