                                       Flaming Cheetos
Purpose
   To demonstrate an exothermic reaction with the use of O2 and Cheetos.
Materials
   Round bottom flask (250 – 300 mL)                 Liquid N2
   Vacuum adaptor                                    Cheetos
   Stopper with hole                                 Bunsen burner
   Dewar                                             Tongs
   Ring stand/clamp                                  Hot/Cold Gloves
   400 mL Beaker
Procedure
   Preparation of Liquid Oxygen:
   1.  Assemble the glassware as shown
   2.  Fill the dewar with liquid nitrogen.
   3.  Turn on the oxygen and lover the round bottom flack into the dewar.
   4.  Make sure the oxygen is turned on enough so that there is a gentle flow exiting through
       the hole in the stopper.
   5. As the oxygen is being formed, be sure to check that the liquid nitrogen level is
       maintained near the top of the dewar. If there is not enough liquid nitrogen, the gas will
       not cool enough and no/little liquid oxygen will form.
   6. This process will take ~30 min, the oxygen will be formed in the round bottom flask and
       has a light blue color.
   Presentation:
   7. Pour the liquid oxygen from the round bottom flask into the 400 mL beaker
   8. Light the Bunsen burner, and insert a cheeto into the flame till it can burn independently.
   9. Using extreme caution drop the flaming cheeto into the liquid oxygen and immediately
       step back.
   10. Watch as the liquid ignites and burns brightly. Avoid looking directly into the flame
   11. Adding more Cheetos will allow the reaction to continue until the liquid oxygen is
       completely used up.
Safety
   1. Liquid oxygen is EXTREMELY dangerous and should be handled with the upmost care.
   2. The beaker is very hot after the demo and should be allowed to cool slightly before
       removing with hot/cold gloves. It can still cause burns through the gloves.
                                                                                 Reactions: More 65


    3. The beaker in which the reaction takes place can shatter, and care should be taken to
         protect from any possible glass shards.
Disposal
   Any remaining Cheetos that aren’t completely charred can be put back into the bag and used
for this demo in the future.
Reactions: More 66
