                                             Liquid O2
Purpose
   To illustrate the paramagnetic properties of liquid oxygen and diamagnetic properties of
   liquid nitrogen.
Materials
      liquid O2 generator                                 liquid nitrogen
      O2 gas                                              dewars for liquid N2 baths
      strong magnet
Procedure
   Preparation – At least 3 hours are needed
        1.     Set up the liquid O2 generator as illustrated below:
        2.     Place the apparatus in the hood and make sure that both the round bottom flask
               and the collecting tube are immersed in liquid N2 (use dewars). This must be
               maintained throughout the collection process.
        3.     Attach tubing from the O2 source to the O2 generator as illustrated above.
        4.     Turn on O2 and wait until enough liquid O2 is collected. Turn off O2.
        5.     Keep liquid O2 immersed in liquid N2 in dewar.
   Presentation
   1.       Place the permanent magnet on the overhead projector (or in front of the video
            camera) so the pole gap shows on the screen.
   2.       Pour liquid N2 into the pole gap.
   3.       Pour liquid O2 into the pole gap showing the O2 fills the pole gap and then boils
            away.
                                                                         Liquids, Solids and Colloids 5


Additional Information
   1.      Show the blue color of liquid O2 before the experiment.
   2.      Wear thermal gloves when handling the liquid O2 in the test tube.
   3.      The permanent magnet is very strong. Be careful near magnetic strips (credit cards,
           etc.).
Question for the Students
    1.    Why does the O2 stick between the poles and the N2 does not?
Disposal
   Liquid O2 is dangerous and should be handled with care. Excess O2 from this demonstration
   can be used for the Flaming Cheetos demo.
Reference
   University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Liquids, Solids, and Colloids 6
