                                         Polyurethane
                                    “The Helping Hand”
Purpose
   To demonstrate the production and solidification of polyurethane polymer.
Materials
   Mountains in Minutes (hobby kit –                    disposable beaker (100 or 200 mL is
       Solutions A and B)                               plenty)
   latex glove                                          2 small plastic cups
   food coloring                                        disposable stick for mixing
Procedure
   Preparation
  1.      Measure equal volumes of Solution A and B into plastic cups (10 mL each is plenty).
   Presentation
   1.      Add a drop or 2 of food coloring to solution A.
   2.      Pour the solutions together and stir.
   3.      Pour the mixture into the latex glove and mix by massaging the glove. Continue until
           you have the developing foam distributed evenly through the fingers. Then lay the
           glove on the paper and observe.
   4.      Once the foam has hardened you can give one of your students a hand with their
           chemistry!
Additional Information
   1.      Variation: The components can simply be mixed in the disposable beaker and set
           on the paper. The foam will form and overflow the beaker onto the paper.
   2.      Solution A contains polyether polyol, a blowing agent, a silicone surfactant and a
           catalyst.
   3.      Solution B contains a polyfuctional isocyanate.
   4.      The general reaction is:
                                                                           O   H        H  O
  HO   R   O H    +  O    C  N    R ' N   C   O             [   O  R    O  C   N   R '  N  C  ]
                                                                                      Polymers 7


Disposal
   The solid can be disposed of in the trash. Any of the remaining solutions can be completely
   reacted and made into the foam, allowing for easier cleanup.
Reference
   Shakharshiri, Bassam. Chemical Demonstrations, Volume I, 1983
Polymers 8
