                    Water to Wine (Water to Wine to Beer to Milk)
Purpose
   To demonstrate concentration differences between acids and bases through color changes and
   precipitate formation and to explain the solution process of simple ionic and covalent
   compounds using visual, particulate representations.
Materials
       4 display glasses                                Sat. NaHCO3 solution
       Phenolphthalein                                  Sat. BaCl2
       Bromothymol Blue                                 6M H2SO4
Procedure
Preparation
   1.      Fill the first display glass (#1) with 25 mL of saturated sodium bicarbonate. Fill
           display glass with water until it is ¾ full.
                                                        .
   2.      Add 20 drops of the phenolphthalein indicator into the second display glass (#2).
   3.      Add 10 mL of 6M sulfuric acid to the third display glass (#3) right before starting the
           demo. Then add 16 drops of the bromothymol blue indicator to the glass. Swirl
           contents.
   4.      Add 10 mL of saturated barium chloride to the fourth display glass (#4).
Demonstration
   1.       Hold up display glass #1 with the "water".
            a. Tell the students that you are thirsty and will have a glass of water after a long
                day (if applicable), but that you're not sure if water is what you really want right
                now. Tell them that maybe you feel more like having a glass of wine.
    2.      Pour the contents from display glass #1 into display glass #2 and the solution will
            tum red and hence the "wine" solution.
            a. Say "Now that's better, but maybe I'm more in the mood for a refreshing beer".
    3. Pour the contents from display glass #2 into display glass #3 and the solution will tum
       yellowish and bubbles will form creating a "head" of foam on the "beer". Make sure to
       not pour too fast or the solution could bubble over.
            a. Say "Ah, this is great, but maybe I've had a little too much to drink so I should
                drink something healthier... like milk (as you perform step 4)".
                                                                                        Acids/Bases 11


   4. Pour the contents from display glass #3 into display glass #4 and the solution will turn
       white. The white precipitate, BaC03, makes this solution seem like "milk".
          a. Say "Now this is perfect"
Safety
   Solutions can be collected in a properly labelled waste container with UI# 202525.
Disposal
   The "Milk" solution should be placed in a properly labeled waste container. All other
   solutions can be poured down the drain with excess water.
Acids/Bases 12
